Blocked Port By-Pass Application: Apart from HTTP/HTTPS, all other ports are blocked. Our College LAN does not allow port 22 (SSH Port). Therefore, develop a tool that bypasses blocked port 22.

New Network Protocol: UDP and TCP protocols have few problems/short-comings. Identify them and design your own Network Protocol.

TOR: TOR is a very famous applications used in college/university by students for tunneling websites. Most of the college internet providers have even blocked TOR. So, build similar application for tunneling and defend yourself against network surveillance and traffic analysis.

Chat Application using AJAX

Lan Audio(Voice) Chat: Can be easily implemented in Java with Java-net and Java Sample Audio API.

Group Chat in Java: Again it's easy to implement. A basic knowledge of Concurrent Server will do.

Media Player in Java: Easy to implement. Thanks to Java Sample Sound/Audio API.

MP3 Extractor from you-Tube

Text Editor: Designing UI for text editor with Java Swing is a cake walk. Use an advanced data structure like suffix tree, Patricia Tree, etc for searching.

Zip Password Crackers: Any File Can be unzipped through the command line, providing password as an argument. So, write a simple brute force program to generate permutations (possible passwords) and send it to command line, creating and running shell script. Run until you receive a success return call, that's it, the simple Zip Password Cracker Project is ready.

Create a Trojan Horse in C: Again that's pretty easy. Run a simple C++ program on remote computer. Intelligently create a huge .dll file in SYS 32 directory and as an impact, eat the hard-disk space of victim's computer. Any Clean up software ignore .dll file, so the only solution is: Victims have to reformat the hard drive.

Simple C++ Key Logger Project : A project that records the key strokes of PC and store it in intelligent way. Again, that can be easily done with Microsoft visual C++ SetWindowsHookEx API. The premiere challenge is you have to be smart enough to outplay Anti-Virus in detecting your key-logger.

3D Bounce in OpenGL: Small game project, can be easily done with OpenGL-API for rendering 2D and 3D computer graphics.

Regular Expression Parser: C application that parses regular Expression.

Remote Editing with CGI: Editing a document on another machine via the Web. The useful tools:The cgi module, along with the cgitb module for debugging are available with Python .

Arcade games in Python: Python provides Pygame, an extension that enables you to write full-fledged, full-screen arcade games in Python.

Voice based Web Browser: Develop a web browser that takes input as speech and renders output as Speech. Lot of frame work and tools are available. Good project for PHP, AJAX and J2EE Expert.

Online Test Management: Similar to interviewstreet.com Can be easily done in PHP or any server side scripting Language.

CMS: Develop a CMS similar to Joomla, Drupal,etc. Students of National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli developed a CMS named Pragyan. They use this project for maintaining college web-site as well as Tech-Fest Website.

Discussion Forum: Develop something like http://www.quora.com/, Stack Overflow , DISQUS

Intranet File Search Engine:

A Social Code Sharing Site: Build a user-driven application with much more interactivity and some social-style features—specifically, a community-based repository of useful, reusable code.Something like Django snippets. This project can be easily done in Django (web framework).

Highly Confidential Security System:Develop an application for storing file, images , audio , video ,etc. in a secure way. Use an advance and almost non- crack-able cipher(Blowfish, AES, etc.) to encrypt data(text data & media-file) before caching them in a password protected locker.

Defect Tracking Tool : Develop and application to track defects in different product and implement various defects and their analysis.

Search tool based on data-mining algorithm: When you type the first letter in facebook search box, have you ever noticed, the friend name whom you search frequently or with whom you interact mostly in fb appears on the top of the suggestion box. That's because of highly efficient data-mining algorithm implemented by facebook. Develop similar tool and add few additional as well as custom features.

Classifier: Most of the existing classifiers are not quite accurate. Either read some paper or modify the existing algorithm or propose a new algorithm for classification. Develop a classifier and prove that your classifier is more efficient than existing one.

RSS Feed Creator – A program which can read in text from other sources and put it in RSS or Atom news format for syndication.

Post it Notes Program – A program where you can add text reminders and post them. You can have the program also add popup reminders.

Quote Tracker (market symbols etc) – A program which can go out and check the current value of stocks for a list of symbols entered by the user. The user can set how often the stocks are checked and the program can show green up and red down arrows to show which direction the stock value has moved.

Guestbook / Journal – A simple application that allows people to add comments or write journal entries. It can allow comments or not and timestamps for all entries. Could also be made into a shout box.

News Ticker and Game Scores – A program which sits on your desktop and aggregates news and game scores from various sources on the net. It then scrolls them across the screen on regular intervals.

Fortune Teller (Horoscope) – A program that checks your horoscope on various astrology sites and puts them together for you each day.

Vigenere / Vernam / Caesar Ciphers – Functions for encrypting and decrypting data messages. Then send them to a friend.

Random Gift Suggestions – Enter various gifts for certain people when you think of them. When its time to give them a gift (xmas, birthday, anniversary) it will randomly pick one and perhaps places you can get it.

Text to HTML Generator – Converts text files into web HTML files and stylizes them. Great for making online documentation of standard text documentation.

CD Key Generator – Generates a unique key for your applications to use based on some arbitrary algorithm that you can specify. Great for software developers looking to make shareware that can be activated.

Regex Query Tool – A tool that allows the user to enter a text string and then in a separate control enter a regex pattern. It will run the regular expression against the source text and return any matches or flag errors in the regular expression.

FTP Program – A file transfer program which can transfer files back and forth from a remote web sever.

Get Atomic Time from Internet Clock – This program will get the true atomic time from an atomic time clock on the Internet. There are various clocks across the world. Do a search for a list of them.

Chat Application (IRC or MSN Style) – Create a chat application that can create simple chat rooms like on Internet Relay Chat (IRC) or a more direct chatting style like MSN. For added complexity, create your own protocol to facilitate this chatting.

Fetch Current Weather – Get the current weather for a given zip/postal code.

P2P File Sharing App – Create a program like LimeWire, FrostWire, Bearshare, or a torrent style application.

Port Scanner – Enter an IP address and a port range where the program will then attempt to find open ports on the given computer by connecting to each of them. On any successful connections mark the port as open.

Mail Checker (POP3 / IMAP) – The user enters various account information include web server and IP, protocol type (POP3 or IMAP) and the application will check for email on several accounts at a given interval.

Packet Sniffer – A utility program that will read packets coming in and out of the machine along with related information like destination and payload size.

Country from IP Lookup – Enter an IP address and find the country that IP is registered in.

Whois Search Tool – Enter an IP or host address and have it look it up through whois and return the results to you.

Zip / Postal Code Lookup – Enter a zip or postal code and have it return which city/cities that are in that zip code.

Remote Login – Create a remote desktop style application which can see and control the remote computer (given you have permissions). It may require the use of your own private network and a second computer to test with.

Site Checker with Time Scheduling – An application that attempts to connect to a website or server every so many minutes or a given time and check if it is up. If it is down, it will notify you by email or by posting a notice on screen.

Small Web Server – A simple web server that can serve HTML files that contain Javascript and other forms of non-code executing code. Added complexity would be to try and implement streaming video, create a server-side language, or serve up other stream types.

Web Bot – An automated program which carries out tasks on the web including checking websites, page scraping, and summarization of data or web posting.

Product Inventory Project – Create an application which manages an inventory of products. Create a product class which has a price, id, and quantity on hand. Then create an inventory class which keeps track of various products and can sum up the inventory value.

Movie Store – Manage video rentals and controls when videos are checked out, due to return, overdue fees and for added complexity create a summary of those accounts which are overdue for contact.

Airline / Hotel Reservation System – Create a reservation system which books airline seats or hotel rooms. It charges various rates for particular sections of the plane or hotel. Example, first class is going to cost more than coach. Hotel rooms have penthouse suites which cost more. Keep track of when rooms will be available and can be scheduled.

Student Grade Book Application – Keep track of students (with a student class that has their name, average, and scores) in a class and their grades. Assign their scores on tests and assignments to the students and figure out their average and grade for the class. For added complexity put the students on a bell curve.

Bank Account Manager - Create a class called “Account” which will be an abstract class for three other classes called “CheckingAccount”, “SavingsAccount” and “BusinessAccount”. Manage credits and debits from these accounts through an ATM style program.

Library Catalog – Create a book class with a title, page count, ISBN and whether or not it is checked out or not. Manage a collection of various books and allow the user to check out books or return books. For added complexity generate a report of those books overdue and any fees. Also allow users to put books on reserve.

Create A Progress Bar for Downloads – Create a progress bar for applications that can keep track of a download in progress. The progress bar will be on a separate thread and will communicate with the main thread using delegates.

Download Manager – Allow your program to download various files and each one is downloading in the background on a separate thread. The main thread will keep track of the other thread’s progress and notify the user when downloads are completed.

Chat Application (remoting style) – Create a chat application which allows you to connect directly to another computer by their IP through the use of remoting and allow your “server” application handle multiple incoming connections.

Bulk Thumbnail Creator – Picture processing can take a bit of time for some transformations. Especially if the image is large. Create an image program which can take hundreds of images and converts them to a specified size in the background thread while you do other things. For added complexity, have one thread handling re-sizing, have another bulk renaming of thumbnails etc.

WYSIWG (What you see is what you get) Editor – Create an editor online which allows people to move around elements, create tables, write text, set colors etc for web pages without having to know HTML. Think Dreamweaver or FrontPage but for online sites. If you need an example check out the DIC page used to create a post.

Web Browser with Tabs – Create a small web browser that allows you to navigate the web and contains tabs which can be used to navigate to multiple web pages at once. For simplicity don’t worry about executing Javascript or other client side code.

Page Scraper – Create an application which connects to a site and pulls out all links, or images, and saves them to a list. For added complexity, organize the indexed content and don’t allow duplicates. Have it put the results into an easily searchable index file.

File Downloader – An application which can download various objects on a page including video streams or all files on a page. Great for pages with a lot of download links.

Telnet Application – Create an application which can telnet into servers across the internet and run basic commands.

Online White Board – Create an application which allows you and friends to collaborate on a white board online. Draw pictures, write notes and use various colors to flesh out ideas for projects. For added complexity try building in picture tubes.

Bandwidth Monitor – A small utility program that tracks how much data you have uploaded and downloaded from the net during the course of your current online session. See if you can find out what periods of the day you use more and less and generate a report or graph that shows it.

Bookmark Collector and Sorter – An application that you can put online for people to upload bookmarks to, have it sort them, remove duplicates and export the entire list as a Firefox/IE/Safari bookmark file. For added complexity see if you can group the bookmark items into various folders.

Password Safe – A program which keeps track of passwords for sites or applications and encrypts them with a key so that no one can read them.

Media Player Widget for iGoogle – Create an iGoogle gadget which can play various song lists from your computer as well as share one song daily. Perhaps let people look up which songs you have listened to lately.

Text Based Game Like Utopia – Create a simple text based RPG like Utopia where you can create a civilization, gather resources, forge alliances, cast spells and more on a turn based system. See if you can dominate the kingdom.

Scheduled Auto Login and Action – Make an application which logs into a given site on a schedule and invokes a certain action and then logs out. This can be useful for checking web mail, posting regular content, or getting info for other applications and saving it to your computer.

E-Card Generator – Make a site that allows people to generate their own little e-cards and send them to other people. Can use flash or not. Use a picture library and perhaps insightful mottos or quotes.

Content Management System – Create a content management system (CMS) like Joomla, Drupal, PHP Nuke etc. Start small and allow for the addition of modules/addons later.

Template Maker – Make a site or application which allows the user to enter in various color codes, elements, dimensions and constructs a template file for a particular application like PHPBB, Invision Board, MySpace, Bebo, etc.

CAPTCHA Maker – Ever see those images with letters a numbers when you signup for a service and then asks you to enter what you see? It keeps web bots from automatically signing up and spamming. Try creating one yourself for online forms. If you use PHP, take a look at the image functions of GD.

Quiz Maker – Make an application which takes various questions form a file, picked randomly, and puts together a quiz for students. Each quiz can be different and then reads a key to grade the quizzes.

Quick Launcher – A utility program that allows the user to assign various programs to icons on a toolbar. Then by clicking the buttons they can quickly launch the programs with parameters etc. Much like Windows quick launch.

File Explorer – Create your own windows explorer program but with added features, better searching, new icons and other views.

Sort File Records Utility – Reads a file of records, sorts them, and then writes them back to the file. Allow the user to choose various sort style and sorting based on a particular field.

Add Transactions In File and Find Averages – Read in a file of financial transactions, group them into accounts, add up fields or find averages or apply credits and debits to each account.

Create Zip File Maker – The user enters various files from different directories and maybe even another computer on the network and the program transfers them and zips them up into a zip file. For added complexity, apply actual compression to the files.

PDF Generator – An application which can read in a text file, html file or some other file and generates a PDF file out of it. Great for a web based service where the user uploads the file and the program returns a PDF of the file.

Bulk Renamer and Organizer – This program will take a series of files and renames them with a specific filename filter entered by the user. For instance if the user enters myimage###.jpg it will rename all files with a “minimum” of three numbers like “myimage001.jpg”, “myimage145.jpg” or even “myimage1987.jpg” since 1987 has at least three numbers.

Mp3 Tagger – Modify and add ID3v1 tags to MP3 files. See if you can also add in the album art into the MP3 file’s header as well as other ID3v2 tags.

Log File Maker – Make an application which logs various statistics in response to given events. This can be something that logs what an application does, what the system is doing, when something like a file changes etc.

Excel Spreadsheet Exporter – Create an online application which can read in a file and create an Excel Spreadsheet to export back. This can be through CVS or other file formats. For added complexity, see if you can create formula fields as well.

RPG Character Stat Creator – Make a program which will randomly create a character’s stats based on several rules set forth by the user. Have it generate a class, gender, strength/magic/dexterity points, and extra abilities or trades. Have it save it to a file which can then be printed out by a dungeon master.

Image Map Generator – Image maps are those images on the web that have multiple hover points that link to different pages. Such images may include maps or splash pages. See if you can make one where the user specifies an image, clicks hotspots in the image and specify links. It will then generate the HTML code to a file that the user can then copy and paste into their website to make the image map.

File Copy Utility – Create a utility that can do bulk file copying and backups of other files.

Code Snippet Manager – Another utility program that allows coders to put in functions, classes or other tidbits to save for use later. Organized by the type of snippet or language the coder can quickly look up code. For extra practice try adding syntax highlighting based on the language.

Versioning Manager – Create your own versioning system for code files. Users are forced to check out items and lock items during reading and writing so that a group of programmers are not accidentally overwriting code files on one another.

SQL Query Analyzer – A utility application which a user can enter a query and have it run against a local database and look for ways to make it more efficient.

Remote SQL Tool – A utility that can execute queries on remote servers from your local computer across the Internet. It should take in a remote host, user name and password, run the query and return the results.

Baseball / Other Card Collector – Create an online application for keeping track of a collection of cards. Let the user enter all cards in a set, check off which ones they have, which ones they need and generate lists of cards they are looking for. For extra complexity, have it sum up sets and generate reports on how close they are of completing sets or the current value of a set.

Report Generator – Create a utility that generates a report based on some tables in a database. Generates a sales reports based on the order/order details tables or sums up the days current database activity.

Database Backup Script Maker – A program which reads a database’s objects, relationships, records and stored procedures and creates a .sql file which can then be imported into another database or kept as a backup file to rebuild the database with.

Event Scheduler and Calendar – Make an application which allows the user to enter a date and time of an event, event notes and then schedule those events on a calendar. The user can then browse the calendar or search the calendar for specific events. For added complexity, allow the application to create reoccurrence events that reoccur every day, week, month, year etc.

Budget Tracker – Write an application that keeps track of a household’s budget. The user can add expenses, income, and recurring costs to find out how much they are saving or losing over a period of time. For added complexity allow the user to specify a date range and see the net flow of money in and out of the house budget for that time period.

Address Book – Keep track of various contacts, their numbers, emails and little notes about them like a Rolodex in the database. For extra complexity, allow the user to connect to a website publish their address book based on specific options the user has set.

TV Show Tracker – Got a favorite show you don’t want to miss? Don’t have a PVR or want to be able to find the show to then PVR it later? Make an application which can search various online TV Guide sites, locate the shows/times/channels and add them to a database application. The database/website then can send you email reminders that a show is about to start and which channel it will be on.

Travel Planner System – Make a system that allows users to put together their own little travel itinerary and keep track of the airline / hotel arrangements, points of interest, budget and schedule.

Entity Relationship Diagram (ERD) Creator – A program that allows the user to put together ERD diagram and save it or have it generate some basic SQL syntax to give them a jump start.

Database Translation (MySQL <-> SQL Server) – A simple utility that reads in from one database and constructs SQL compliant with another database. Then saves that to another database. One popular transition would be to and from MySQL server for databases like SQL Server and Oracle.

Web Board (Forum) – Create a forum for you and your buddies to post, administer and share thoughts and ideas.